The Project Gutenberg eBook of What luck!, by Abbie Farwell Brown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: What luck!
       A study in opposites

Author: Abbie Farwell Brown

Release Date: December 13, 2022 [eBook #69532]

Language: English

Produced by: Bob Taylor and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHAT LUCK! ***





Transcriber’s Note

Italic text displayed as: _italic_




                             WHAT LUCK!

[Illustration: Kids with nurses]




                             WHAT LUCK!

                        A STUDY IN OPPOSITES

                                 BY
                         ABBIE FARWELL BROWN


                  MASSACHUSETTS CHARITABLE EYE AND
                            EAR INFIRMARY
                               BOSTON


              ISSUED _for private distribution only by
                  the_ MASSACHUSETTS CHARITABLE EYE
                 AND EAR INFIRMARY _and presented to
                their friends with their compliments_

                              1827-1920




                             WHAT LUCK!


Side by side on the crowded waiting bench of the Infirmary sat two
women, each with a child at her elbow, who had been eyeing one
another furtively. They were silently criticizing in different
languages.

“Her mourning must have cost much money!” thought Mrs. Rogazrovitch,
enviously, looking down at her own painful saffron coat.

“Cielo! What a terrible hat!” mused the other woman, considering the
purple velvet creation that crowned the frowzy locks of her neighbor.
“She can have no care to hold the love of her husband!” And she wiped
a tear with her black-bordered handkerchief.

The eyes of little Stephanie, who stood at the knee of Mrs.
Rogazrovitch, were red and swollen; but not with weeping. Even the
subdued light of the waiting-room made her squint horribly, and she
kept her eyes turned from the window. This brought in direct line
her neighbor, the pale, emaciated little boy at the other woman’s
side. Stephanie was five; the boy seemed older. He hung his head and
never looked up. Stephanie was ready to make friends, for she had
grown tired of the long wait, but Paolo’s mother was in the way. She
was continually bending over the boy, smoothing his hair or kissing
his forehead, in what seemed to Stephanie a very silly fashion.
Stephanie’s mother never kissed her at all.

Gradually Stephanie edged nearer. “Hello!” she said in a stage
whisper suited to the solemn occasion. “Is your eyes sick, too?”

The boy stared, gave a blinking glance from big, brown eyes, and
nodded.

“They look red, like mine,—only worse,” commented Stephanie, after
this revealing look. “But they will fix them all right, if we’re
lucky. The lady said so.” Again the boy glanced at her pitifully, but
said nothing.

“Do you go to Kindergarten?” asked Stephanie. The boy shook his head.
“I don’t go nowhere,” he said.

“I guess you are too big for Kindergarten. Oh, it’s the grandest
place!” went on Stephanie ecstatically. “But I had to stop when my
eyes got sick.—What makes your mother wear those black clothes? I
hate black clothes.”

“My father died,” said Paolo solemnly.

“My father ran off,” volunteered Stephanie. “I think he went to be a
soldier. Mrs. Raftery says it was because—”

“Stephanie! You shut up!” Mrs. Rogazrovitch jerked her by the arm.
The attendant was saying something.

“Eighty-six!” he repeated. It was the number on the red ticket that
Mrs. Rogazrovitch clutched in not over-clean fingers.

“Come on, you Stephanie!” snapped the mother. And the slatternly
woman with the curly-haired child stepped forward to the table.

Yes; there was no doubt about it. Stephanie was a case of that
tubercular eye trouble which affects so many children of the poor;
a trouble caused by constitutional weakness, lack of care and of
wholesome food. Unless properly treated Stephanie would become
partially or wholly blind some day. And the pretty blue eyes would
never play their part in a world where all the eyes are needed. But
Stephanie was in one respect luckier than Paolo, who still waited,
encircled by his affectionate mother’s arm. Strange negative “luck”
that consisted in not being _too-much_ loved by any one!

“You’d better leave her here,” said the Doctor, after he had examined
the poor little eyes.

The woman blinked. “How long must she to stay?” she asked cautiously.

“Well, maybe three weeks; it’s an average case, I should say. We’ll
take the best care of her,” he added kindly. But Mrs. Rogazrovitch
was not worrying as he surmised.

“I don’ care. But will she grow well forever?” she asked. “She not be
blind, eh?”

“She can be cured if you keep up the treatment as we tell you, after
she goes home. You must bring her back for examination; give her milk
and wholesome food, well cooked,—no doughnuts and candy; and,”—the
doctor referred to Stephanie’s card,—“clean up your house and keep it
in better condition. We shall keep an eye on Stephanie. And if you
can’t do all this, we must find a better home for her.”

The woman looked sulky. “How much it costs to keep in the Hospital?”
she asked. She was told that the usual charge was seventeen dollars
and a half for a week, but that if she could not afford so much, the
Superintendent would probably arrange to let her pay what she could.

“I can’t to pay anything for sick child!” exclaimed the woman. “I can
just to pay rent and get some food. Two years ago my man goes off. I
don’ know. Maybe he’s fighting; but I don’ get nothing.”

“That’s all right,” said the Doctor. “You go see the Superintendent.
We’ll look after Stephanie anyway.—By the way, will you sign this
paper giving us permission to fix her adenoids and tonsils while she
is here? I daresay you don’t care?”

“No; _I_ don’ care,” said the woman casually, with the air of one
conferring a favor.

Of course she did not realize how great a privilege Stephanie was
getting. Few citizens know that the Massachusetts Eye and Ear
Infirmary is the only Hospital in the city where a child with a
trouble like Stephanie’s would be so taken in and cared for. All such
cases are referred to the Infirmary. How should Mrs. Rogazrovitch
guess that the kind hands which were to care for the child and the
kind faces surrounding her belonged to the best specialists and the
best nurses anywhere to be found? She only knew that for the time
being a burden was lifted. And this was Stephanie’s advantage over
Paolo, whose mother loved him too fatuously to give him his only
chance.

“Eighty-seven!” called the attendant, after Stephanie and her mother
had passed on. It was Paolo’s turn.

“She says,—she could not spare me; she loves me too much. And
besides, my father would not let her,” the boy answered a question in
a hollow voice. “He was very sick, and last week he died. He would
not let me be in a Hospital.” Helplessly he raised to the doctor eyes
which should have been very beautiful; the eyes of a poet or painter.

“But why then did not your mother bring you back for treatment, as I
told her?” asked the doctor again. The woman began to weep. “She says
she could not leave my father,” interpreted the boy. “She loved him
very much. Once she did try to come here with me, after the Visitor
called. But she could not find the way. She says her head is sick.
And she lost her ring. That made her very sad indeed.”

“Did she give you the medicine regularly?”

The boy hesitated. “Sometimes,” he said; “when the Visitor came. I
think my mother forgot; she was so sad about my father. She sat in a
chair and rocked all day. She is very kind and loving. She held me on
her lap and cried, and cried.”

The Doctor frowned. “Is there any one here who can speak Italian?”
he called out to the waiting crowd. A man stepped forward, while the
Doctor sent Paolo aside. “Tell her, please, that unless she brings
Paolo here regularly, and gives him the medicine every day, I will
not answer for the consequences.—Do you see that boy over there?” The
Doctor indicated a tiny fellow with fine Greek features, whose mother
was crying over him in the corner. “Well; that woman would not leave
him in our care, because she was too obstinate. And although she
lives close by, she would not take the time and trouble to bring him
in for treatment. So now he will lose the sight of one eye at least.
Tell Mrs. Valentino that Paolo’s eyes are very bad, and he will fare
worse than that boy, unless she does as I say.”

The woman burst into hysterical grief, and clasped Paolo
passionately, mumbling endearing syllables in her musical tongue. The
boy’s brown eyes filled too, and he tried to comfort her. Pitying
herself for her many troubles, the mother led Paolo away.

“She will not come back,” thought the Doctor. “I see it in her face.
The Social Service Department will have to get busy.”

The Social Service Department of the Infirmary did get busy, as in
all such cases. When Paolo did not reappear, they went to look him
up. The Visitor coaxed and re-urged the dazed, inefficient mother.
But it was hopeless. Finally the case was reported to the proper
authorities. But already Paolo’s mother had loved him to death.
Stephanie was not to see her little neighbor again.

Meanwhile, for Stephanie herself there had begun what was—apart from
a little discomfort at the beginning—the happiest three weeks she
had ever known. To begin with, her poor ragged clothes were taken
away, and she had a lovely warm bath in a tub; in itself a novel
experience. With her yellow curls nicely brushed, sweet and clean
from top to toe, she was then tucked away in a little white cot all
by herself,—this also was an unheard-of luxury!—in a sunny, airy room
where other clean children were playing about like a happy family.
At first poor little Stephanie was too miserable to do more than
snuggle into the soft, sweet pillow, and allow herself sulkily to
be fed with easily swallowed things. A kind Voice, associated with
strong and gentle hands, attended to her wants. But Stephanie slept
most of the time; dreaming of happy faces, merry laughter, and feet
running about a Kindergarten.

After two days of existing as a mere little mollusc, one morning
Stephanie sat up and began to take notice. A beautiful white-clad
Being put her into a neat cotton frock and pinafore. Only Stephanie’s
scarred shoes were left to remind her of the home that seemed
mercifully far away. They tied a shade over her eyes, to help the
squint, and for the first time she looked around with interest at the
nursery.

What a pleasant place it was! Stephanie had never seen anything
nearly so beautiful; except the Kindergarten. Poor little Stephanie!
It had been hard luck to give up the Kindergarten, just when she was
growing so happy there. The school nurse had seen that she must stop.
But—there was a rose on the table here, too! A red rose! And children
playing games, just like a real kindergarten! But these children were
not all of Stephanie’s age. Some were bigger; some much littler. Why,
in the very next cot to her lay a wee baby, sucking a bottle. Nurse
said its mother was sick in another room. Stephanie thought this baby
would be nicer than a doll to play with. And oh, _oh_! Over there
was a little black live doll, with eyes that rolled and blinked, and
real hair standing up all over her head; and a big red bow! Stephanie
grinned at the doll; and oh, _oh_! The doll grinned back! Stephanie
waved her arms up and down. And the funny doll stretched her mouth
in white-toothed glee, and did just what Stephanie did. This was
better even than Kindergarten!

What else was there in the lovely room? Stephanie looked around.
There were nine little beds against the walls, and as many more in
the next ward, as she soon learned when she began to investigate.
Most of the beds were empty in the daytime. Across the room from
Stephanie a big boy sat up among pillows, reading. He laughed when
Nurse told him a funny story, but could only whisper in reply,
holding on to his throat. Stephanie understood perfectly, and was
very sorry for poor Tom. She was sorrier still when dinner-time came;
when she and the other dressed children gathered about little low
tables, with bibs on. Soup was all that poor Tom could swallow. But
Stephanie could eat fish, and potato; and there was a nice pudding,
too! Poor Tom! Stephanie ate ravenously, after her two days’ fast.
No puddings ever happened in the home she had left.

The twenty little children were too busy eating to talk. “More bread
and butter? More milk? Yes, indeed. All you want.” Just think;
Stephanie could have all the milk she wanted! That had never happened
before in her life. She thought she must be in Heaven. The children
were of all shades and manners,—perhaps that was like Heaven, too;
who knows? Most of them wore curious foreign names, but they all
spoke English, after a fashion. Some of them were just learning the
ways of good Americans at the table and elsewhere. Frank, who sat
next Stephanie, was a little pig. He made faces, spilled his milk
and scattered his crumbs, so that She,—the Angel in white,—scolded
him, and made him sit by himself at another table, till he should be
more careful.

But Stephanie liked John, with the big grey eyes, who was a little
gentleman; though he wore such a funny thing like a bonnet on his
head,—and he a big boy of eight! Stephanie loved at first sight
Dottie Dimple with the pink cheeks and one lovely blue eye. She cried
when John explained that one day Dottie had poked a pair of scissors
into the other eye, so that it would never see any more.

Then there was Sammy, with the funny face and big nose, who looked
like a little old man in a baby’s dress. Sammy could not hear when
you spoke to him.—But mostly the children forgot all about eyes and
ears between dressing-times, they had so much to make them happy.

After dinner the children put back their chairs nicely, and then the
victrola played lovely music. It was pleasant to see all the little
children stand at salute when they heard the Star-Spangled Banner.
Even the deaf ones did as they saw the others do.

On sunny days they played out on the balcony of the ward below. It
was a pity that they had no balcony of their own, leading from the
nursery. Greatly it is needed. But it will come, no doubt, with a
great many other needed things, when more people know about the
Infirmary on Charles Street, and the good luck it brings to little
children and big; when more parents, reading the story of Paolo,
Stephanie, and these others, will understand that what helps such
children protects the health of the whole community, including their
own little ones.

The ounce of prevention has gone up in the scale of modern values. It
is worth not pounds but _tons_ of possible cure. Every child kept out
of an asylum is a civic asset. Every penny spent in the prevention
of blindness or deafness is an investment placed on interest a
thousandfold.

Those were wonderful days for babies like Stephanie who had seen too
little luck in their lives. Breakfast at half past six; a luncheon of
fruit and milk at nine; dinner at eleven, and supper at four. All the
bread and butter a child could eat; all the milk she wished to drink.
And most of the children drank a quart of milk every day. No wonder
Stephanie began to be less pale and thin before the nurse’s eyes.
No wonder her eyes began to be better almost directly. Soon she was
running and racing about the nursery among the liveliest of them all.

One day a visitor came to talk for a minute with the nurse. She had
been to the clinic, and after that they had given her this extra
privilege. To Stephanie this Person seemed a beautiful grown-up
lady. But Mamie was really only a nice girl of sixteen, with happy,
sunburned face and shining brown eyes. Stephanie squirmed with
delight when Mamie took her up on her lap while she talked with Nurse.

“She has eyes like mine were,” said Mamie in an aside to the nurse.
But Stephanie heard, and hoped. Would her grey-blue eyes ever get big
and brown like this nice Person’s, she wondered?

“Oh, sure! I’m all right now,” said the visitor, in answer to a
question. “They pronounced me O. K. Just look how fat and brown I
am. Say, it don’t seem possible. Why, I was sicker than Stephanie
here when I came, wasn’t I?” The nurse assented. “I’ll never forget
how I felt, working in the store: my eyes all swollen and weepy. I
was down and out, all right. For, of course, I haven’t a relation on
God’s earth. And with my salary,—how could I go to a specialist?
Then a lady gave me a hunch about this Infirmary. So here I came; and
everybody was mighty good to me. You know, don’t you, Dearie?” She
caught Stephanie up close.

“Yes!” affirmed Stephanie, snuggling.

“I came here all in,” Mamie went on. “But what a difference when I
left! Just to think of going to the country for a rest, instead of
right back to the store. And nothing to pay for it all, either. Some
dream!”

“Did you have a good time in the country?” asked the nurse
sympathetically.

“I’ll say so!” cried Mamie. “I just lived out doors four solid weeks,
sitting on the piazza or walking in the garden, like a lady. They
made me lie down to rest after dinner. Rest! Well; the chief thing
I had to do to tire me was _eat_! And such eats! Um! Eggs and milk
between meals, too. Say, the girls at the store will sure think I’m
kidding when I tell them about it.”

“You’ll be sure to come back here, as the Doctor said?” charged the
nurse. “You know, you will have to be careful still.”

“You bet I’ll be careful!” said Mamie earnestly. “I am not going to
take any chances. The Doctor made it plain enough what I’ve got to
do. I’ll keep my eyes, thanks, now I’ve got ’em back.”

The trouble that Stephanie and Paolo and Mamie had cannot certainly
be cured, once for all. It is likely to recur, if care is relaxed;
and each time it makes a worse scar on the eye, with increased
handicaps. The hardest part of the follow-up work of the Infirmary is
to make the parents understand this, and to watch patiently.

Three weeks in a country home, at a cost of five dollars a week,
following three weeks’ treatment at the Eye and Ear Infirmary, had
stood between Mamie and blindness. The Infirmary has an emergency
fund, all too inadequate, for such cases.

“What is the Country?” asked Stephanie, when Mamie had gone. “Is it
My Country-Tiz?” She had an idea that it might have something to
do with a relative of the Star Spangled Banner. “Shall I have to
_salute_ it?”

“Bless you!” cried the nurse. “I guess you will want to salute it,
when you see it for the first time!”

On the last Sunday of her stay Stephanie had a surprise. The Doctor
had pronounced her eyes so much better that she could leave the
following week. Plump, and rosy, and bright-eyed, Stephanie was as
pretty a little girl as one could wish to see. To be sure there was a
fly in her ointment. The Doctor had not succeeded in turning her eyes
into big brown ones like Mamie’s, as Stephanie had suggested. But
nurse assured her that blue eyes would probably wear better in the
long run.

Stephanie was playing peacefully by herself, while the other children
visited with their parents, during the one hour allowed for this
every Sunday.

“Here’s a visitor to see you, Stephanie,” said the nurse. And in
walked Mrs. Rogazrovitch, saffron coat, purple hat, and all. She was
a little cleaner than usual; there was more black upon her boots than
upon her hands. But she was still a striking contrast to Hospital
standards. Stephanie greeted her without enthusiasm. Indeed, when she
spied the familiar face, she shrank back to the skirts of Nurse, with
a little gasp that told more than words. The mother flushed. Other
mothers were watching.

“Well, Stephanie!” she cried in astonishment mingled with pride. “You
do look good! Ain’t ye glad to see me, eh?” Still Stephanie held
back. “Your eyes get well, Stephanie? You’ll be coming home soon,
yes?” But Stephanie pouted and kicked the floor with her toe. Mrs.
Rogazrovitch turned to the nurse. The latter shook her head dubiously.

“Have you fixed up your house as the Doctor said? You know she will
have to be kept clean, and sleep in an airy room. And you’ll have to
feed her right and bring her here often for examination.”

The mother twisted uneasily. “I’ll fix the house up yet,” she
promised. “I ain’t had time, but I will.” Two weeks alone in the
childless tenement had put a new value on Stephanie. And the pretty,
bright-eyed child seemed no longer a mere burden. “I’ll come back for
you next week,” she finished, touching Stephanie’s curls with the
first real tenderness she had ever shown. “Good bye, Stephanie.”

But at the end of her three weeks Stephanie did not go home, though
her eyes no longer needed Hospital care. When Mrs. Rogazrovitch
appeared, ready to reclaim her child, she was staggered with the
counter-suggestion that Stephanie should go to the sea-shore for a
month.

“Stephanie needs a vacation,” was the report. “You must not deprive
her of the chance. It may keep her from having a relapse. Every
relapse is dangerous. And the month will give you time to fix up your
house and get it ready for such a nice little girl to live in.”

The desired result came not without argument. For now Mrs.
Rogazrovitch was set upon having her pretty child back again. But
luckily she was not deaf to reason, as Mrs. Valentino had been. And
the assurance that Stephanie would receive four weeks’ board in
the country free had some weight in the matter. Reluctantly she
consented that Stephanie should go. So the very week that ushered
poor little Paolo into a still further country, from which there
is no return, saw Stephanie saluting the wonders of green fields,
flowers, and ocean shore.

Her mother returned with a slow step to the empty tenement. Mrs.
Raftery, next door, was consumed with curiosity, when with her head
out of window she spied the saffron coat and purple hat entering
dejectedly the door below, unaccompanied.

“Why, where’s Stephanie?” she cried. “I thought you was afther goin’
to fetch home the child.”

The purple hat rose to the occasion with a jerk. “Stephanie is going
for a vacation to the sea-shore,” said Mrs. Rogazrovitch with dignity.

“Glory be!” ejaculated Mrs. Raftery, pulling in her head and sinking
into a chair. The news, swiftly imparted, raised considerably the
standing of Mrs. Rogazrovitch in that neighborhood.

Presently Stephanie’s luck began to take another turn for the better;
for as soon as she was well out of reach on the Island, Stephanie’s
mother began to repent that she had let her go so easily. Others
might covet the now precious possession. She began to suspect a
conspiracy to keep Stephanie permanently exiled. There had been
conditions set upon her return. For the first time Mrs. Rogazrovitch
began to consider seriously the instructions she had received about
hygiene and sanitation.

One morning the neighbors were surprised by an unwonted activity in
the fourth floor back. Clouds of dust, followed by the smell of soap,
issued from the long unopened windows. Dingy articles were banged
viciously and hung out to imbibe the unaccustomed sun. That week was
a perpetual wash-day. Mrs. Raftery had her theory. At last she could
stand the suspense no longer, but put her theory squarely to the
test, with a question.

“I’m making ready for Stephanie’s home-coming,” answered Mrs.
Rogazrovitch tartly. “What do you suppose, anyhow?”

“Blessed Saints!” ejaculated Mrs. Raftery. “I thought you was goin’
to take one lodger at least, the way you’re makin’ everything so
grand an’ tidy. La sakes! An’ it’s only for Stephanie!”

But it was her neighbor’s next remark that smote Mrs. Raftery nearly
dumb. It was made with some hesitation. “Will you—tell me—about
making—soup?—I want to learn to cook.”

When she could recover Mrs. Raftery gasped, “Cookin’, is it? Hivenly
powers! Why, I’ll show ye meself. I’ve been a cook all my life, till
this lameness took me. And sure, there’s a diet kitchen around the
corner, I’m told, where they’ll give ye points.”

It was this repeated conversation that made the neighborhood
hysterical. Mrs. Rogazrovitch cleaning house! Mrs. Rogazrovitch
learning to cook!

“It’s a changed craytur she is entirely!” exclaimed Mrs. Raftery,
to her gossip. “An’ it’s a changed home into which Stephanie will
be comin’ from her vacation at the sea-shore. It’s small blame to
her man that he ran away from that home two years ago, I’m thinkin’.
But the woman will have no trouble at all gettin’ a lodger these
days, the way her rooms be lookin’ so nice and dacint. Say, she’s
been afther tellin’ me that my childher ought to have more fresh
air o’ nights! And doughnuts, she says, is not healthy for infants.
The knowingness of her! Sure, they’ll soon be afther makin’ Mrs.
Rogazrovitch the Prisidint of the Improvemint Society, the way she’s
gettin’ intelligint an’ forthcomin’. An’ she with a child visitin’ at
the sea-shore!”

So when Corporal Rogazrovitch, newly discharged, returned to take a
secret reconnaissance of the home which he had deserted for the sake
of his Country,—and for his own peace of mind,—he heard and saw such
changes as made him decide not to re-enlist. This was another bit of
luck for Stephanie; if you look at it from the right angle.

And then,—there was the Kindergarten, too, for to-morrow!

There was to be no anti-climax after all in Stephanie’s home-coming.




  Transcriber’s Notes

  pg 20 Added hyphen to: heard the Star Spangled

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHAT LUCK! ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
